Massive Set of Changes to DDR4 Guide (#41)
integralfx/MemTestHelper: DDR4 OC Guide.md

* For motherboards with 4 DIMM slots, the number of sticks installed will affect your maximum memory frequency. 
  * On motherboards that use a daisy chain [memory trace layout](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3vQwGGbW1AE), 2 sticks are preferred. Using 4 sticks may significantly impact your maximum memory frequency.
  * On the other hand, motherboards that use T-topology will overclock the best with 4 sticks. Using 2 sticks won't impact your maximum memory frequency as much as using 4 sticks on a daisy chain motherboard (?).
  * Most vendors don't advertise what memory trace layout they use, but you can make an educated guess based on the QVL. For example, the [Z390 Aorus Master](http://download.gigabyte.asia/FileList/Memory/mb_memory_z390-aorus-master_20190214.pdf) uses a T-Toplogy layout and its highest validated frequency is with 4 DIMMs. If the highest validated frequency were done with 2 DIMMs, it *probably* uses a daisy chain layout.

>   * According to Buildzoid, Daisy Chain vs T-Topology only matters above DDR4-4000, however a lot of the overclocking community is critical of this notion. Following Buildzoid's logic, if you're on Ryzen 3000, this doesn't matter as DDR4-3800 is the typical max memory frequency when running MCLK:FCLK 1:1.

Author: Almost everyone I've talked to who's looked into perf of Daisy vs ttop. Myself, alatron and a lot of people who did work on z390 included.

>   * According to Buildzoid, Daisy Chain vs T-Topology only matters above DDR4-4000, however a lot of the overclocking community is critical of this notion. Following Buildzoid's logic, if you're on Ryzen 3000, this doesn't matter as DDR4-3800 is the typical max memory frequency when running MCLK:FCLK 1:1.

Author: also makes a slight different to RTLs and (rarely) IOLs, enough to maybe account for 0.3-0.6ns latency below 4000. Same with timings, I dont think the effect is something that doesnt matter. Z390 Master has issues even below 4000, and 4000 feels like an arbitrary distinction.

* Lower end motherboard may not overclock as well, possibly due to the lower PCB quality and number of layers (?).
  
## Integrated Circuits (ICs)

> * Knowing what ICs (Sometimes reffered to as "Dies") are in your RAM will give you an idea of what to expect. Even if you don't know them you can still overclock your RAM.

Reviewer: "reffered" should be "referred"

   * <sup>1</sup>Rank interleaving allows the memory controller to parallelize memory requests, for example writing on one rank while the other is refreshing. The impact of this is easily observed in AIDA64 copy bandwidth. From the eyes of the memory controller, it doesn't matter whether the second rank is on the same DIMM (two ranks on one DIMM) or a different DIMM (two DIMM in one channel). It does, however, matter from an overclocking perspective when you consider memory trace layouts and BIOS support.
* Density matters when determining how far your ICs can go. For example, 4Gb AFR and 8Gb AFR will not overclock the same despite sharing the same name. The same can be said for Micron Rev.B which exists as both 8Gb and 16Gb. The 16Gb chips overclock better and are sold as both in 16GB and 8GB capacities. The 8GB sticks have their SPD modified and can be found in higher-end Crucial kits (BLM2K8G51C19U4B).

> * As the count of ranks total in a system increases, so does the difficulty of scheduling info by the memory controller. This usually means that more memory ranks will a higher voltage, especially VCCSA on Intel and VSOC on AMD.

Author: As the number of memory banks increased, addressing and simultaneously reading from and writing to each address becomes harder. More memory banks means more bank groups, and so the signal that is sent to the address decoder is gonna need to be more specific and thus harder to run. Running at a higher voltage makes the distinction between different signals easier, which is one of the reasons higher voltage helps. I actually prefer your revision though, so that's ideal.

  * This is the code for dual rank Micron produced in October 2018.
* [Source](http://www.xtremesystems.org/forums/showthread.php?285750-Interesting-memory-deals-thread&p=5230258&viewfull=1#post5230258)

> ### A Note on Logical Ranks and Density

Author: addressed

* Single rank sticks usually clock higher than dual rank sticks, but depending on the benchmark the performance gain from rank interleaving<sup>1</sup> can be significant enough to outperform faster single rank sticks. [This can be observed in both synthetics and games](https://kingfaris.co.uk/ram).
   * On recent platforms (Comet Lake and Zen3), BIOS and memory controller support for dual rank has improved greatly. On many Z490 boards, dual rank Samsung 8Gb B-die (2x16GB) will clock just as high as single-rank B-die, meaning you have all the performance gains of rank interleaving with little to no downsides.
   * <sup>1</sup>Rank interleaving allows the memory controller to parallelize memory requests, for example writing on one rank while the other is refreshing. The impact of this is easily observed in AIDA64 copy bandwidth. From the eyes of the memory controller, it doesn't matter whether the second rank is on the same DIMM (two ranks on one DIMM) or a different DIMM (two DIMM in one channel). It does however matter from an overclocking perspective when you consider memory trace layouts and BIOS support.

> * Density matters when determining how far your ICs can go. For example, 4Gb AFR and 8Gb AFR will not overclock the same despite sharing the same name. The same can be said for Micron Rev. B which exists as both 8Gb and 16Gb. The 16Gb chips overclock better and are sold as both in 16GB and 8GB capacities despite dimms incuding 8 chips. The 8GB sticks have their SPD modified and can be found in higher-end Crucial kits (BLM2K8G51C19U4B).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Density matters when determining how far your ICs can go. For example, 4Gb AFR and 8Gb AFR will not overclock the same despite sharing the same name. The same can be said for Micron Rev. B which exists as both 8Gb and 16Gb. The 16Gb ICs overclock better and are sold as both in 16GB and 8GB capacities despite the DIMMs using 8 chips. The 8GB sticks have their SPD modified and can be found in higher-end Crucial kits (BLM2K8G51C19U4B).
```

### Expected Max Frequency
* Below are the expected max frequency for some of the common ICs:

>   | IC | Frequency attainable at 1.35v (MHz) | Expected Clock Limit (MHz) |

Author: The numbers or why I want it added? It helps you compare frequency behaviour between ICs. C die can clock higher than CJR but that doesn't mean you should go around as if C die scales better for frequency. This shows the scaling and how well it OCs.

  | :-: | :-------------------------: | :------------: |
  | Hynix 8Gb AFR | 3600 | 3600 |
  | Hynix 8Gb CJR | 3800 | 4133<sup>1</sup> |

>   | Hynix 8Gb DJR | 4000+ | Unknown (too high) |

Author: Sounds good

>   | Hynix 8Gb DJR | 4000+ | Unknown (too high) |

Author: done

### Expected Max Frequency
* Below are the expected max frequency for some of the common ICs:

>   | IC | Effective Speed attainable at 1.35V (MT/s) | Expected Max Effective Speed (MT/s) |

Reviewer 2: Sources for the frequencies at 1.35V?

Author: Micron is based on XMPs. AFR is based off the Hynix datasheet. CJR is based on XMP. B die is based on XMP. E die and D die are based off testing on the German Ryzen Ram OC discord and OC discord. These can be removed it that's desired. This section seems to be causing issues. It can be removed.

  | :-: | :-------------------------: | :------------: |
  | Hynix 8Gb AFR | 3600 | 3600 |
  | Hynix 8Gb CJR | 3800 | 4133<sup>1</sup> |
  | Hynix 8Gb DJR | 4000+ | 5000+ |
  | Nanya 8Gb B-die | 3600 | 4000+ |

>   | Micron 8Gb Rev. B | 3400 | 4000

Reviewer 2: Source for Rev. B doing 4000?

Author: Micron Rev B or Nanya B? You put the Nanya B. As for Micron, they literally sell XMP kits that do more than 4000. Furthermore, Rev N is just a modded Rev B, so IC limitations are still the same more or less. Unless you mean I should put it at 5000+, in which case sure.

Reviewer 2: > they literally sell XMP kits that do more than 4000

Of 8Gb Rev B?

> Rev N is just a modded Rev B

16Gb Rev. B not 8Gb.

  | Micron 8Gb Rev. E | 4000+ | 5000+ |
  | Micron 16Gb Rev. B | 4000+ | 5000+ |
  | Samsung 4Gb E-die | 4000+ | 4200+ |
  | Samsung 8Gb B-die | 4000+ | 5000+ |
  | Samsung 8Gb D-die | 4000+ | 4200+ |
  * <sup>1</sup>CJR is a bit inconsistent in my testing. I've tested 3 RipJaws V 3600 CL19 8GB sticks. One of them was stuck at DDR4-3600, another at DDR4-3800 but the last could do DDR4-4000, all at CL16 with 1.45V.
  * Don't expect lower binned ICs to overclock nearly as well as higher binned ICs. This is especially true for [B-die](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmrap-Jrfww).

>   * These values are simply reffering to the IC's average capabilities, however other factors from motherboard to CPU have a substantial impact on whether or not said values are attainabe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * These values are simply referring to the IC's average capabilities, however other factors, such as motherboard and CPU, have a substantial impact on whether or not said values are attainable.
```

  > Stresses greater than those listed under “Absolute Maximum Ratings” may cause permanent damage to the device. This is a stress rating only and functional operation of the device at these or any other conditions above those indicated in the operational sections of this specification is not implied. Exposure to absolute maximum rating conditions for extended periods may affect reliability.
* This value is the official maximum of the DDR4 Spec for which all DDR4 is to be rated for, however numerous ICs are unable to remain safe at such high sustained voltages.[Samsung 8Gb C-die](https://www.hardwareluxx.de/community/f13/samsung-8gbit-ddr4-c-die-k4a8g045wc-overclocking-ergebnisse-im-startbeitrag-1198323.html) is able to degrade with voltages as low as 1.35V under the right thermal and power delivery conditions. Furthermore, there are other ICs, such as Hynix 8Gb DJR or Samsung 8Gb B-Die that have been observed dailying voltages well in excess of 1.55V. Do your research about what voltages are safe on your IC, or stick to 1.35v or similar if this value is not known. Due to random chance and silicon variance, YMMV compared to other people, so be safe.

> * One common limiting factor for the maximum safe voltage on which you can operate is your CPU's architecture. According to [JEDEC](https://www.jedec.org/standards-documents/dictionary/terms/output-stage-drain-power-voltage-vddq), VDDQ, the voltage of data output, is tied to VDD, colloquially referred to as VDIMM or DRAM Voltage. This voltage interacts with the PHY or Physical Layer present on the CPU and may lead to long term degradation of the IMC if set too high. As a result, daily use of VDIMM voltages above 1.60V on Ryzen 3000 and 5000, 1.65V on Cometlake and Coffeelake Refresh and 1.70V on Rocketlake is not adviseable. Air on the side of caution with this, as CPU degreadation of the PHY is difficult to measure or notice until the issue becomes serious.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* One common limiting factor for the maximum safe voltage on which you can operate is your CPU's architecture. According to [JEDEC](https://www.jedec.org/standards-documents/dictionary/terms/output-stage-drain-power-voltage-vddq), VDDQ, the voltage of data output, is tied to VDD, colloquially referred to as VDIMM or DRAM Voltage. This voltage interacts with the PHY or Physical Layer present on the CPU and may lead to long term degradation of the IMC if set too high. As a result, daily use of VDIMM voltages above 1.60V on Ryzen 3000 and 5000, 1.65V on Comet Lake and Coffee Lake Refresh and 1.70V on Rocket Lake is not advisable. Err on the side of caution with this, as CPU degradation of the PHY is difficult to measure or notice until the issue becomes serious.
```

> daily use of VDIMM voltages above 1.60V on Ryzen 3000 and 5000, 1.65V on Comet Lake and Coffee Lake Refresh and 1.70V on Rocket Lake is not advisable

Rocket Lake has only been out for a few months, so where does this come from?

Author: RKL XMP kits. 1.65 i seen on XMP and XMP is never at VDDQ max.

Reviewer 2: Which kits?

I checked on the Z590 Unify X and Z590 Tachyon but the highest voltage is 1.60V.

> * It may be safe to daily 1.60V as there are kits on the [B550 Unify-X QVL](https://www.msi.com/Motherboard/support/MEG-B550-UNIFY-X#support-mem-20) rated for 1.60V. B-Die, 8Gb Rev. E, DJR and 16Gb Rev. B *should* be fine at running 1.60V daily, though it's recommended to have active airflow. Power output of RAM is tied to the voltage at whih it operates, and high temperatures can themselves lower the threshold for what voltages are considered safe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It may be safe to daily 1.60V as there are kits on the [B550 Unify-X QVL](https://www.msi.com/Motherboard/support/MEG-B550-UNIFY-X#support-mem-20) rated for 1.60V. B-Die, 8Gb Rev. E, DJR and 16Gb Rev. B *should* be fine at running 1.60V daily, though it's recommended to have active airflow. Higher voltages leads to higher temperatures and high temperatures can themselves lower the threshold for what voltages are considered safe.
```

  
### Ranking
* Below is how most of the common ICs rank in terms of frequency and timings.
  | Tier | ICs | Description |
  | :-:  | :-: | :--:        |
  | S | Samsung 8Gb B-Die | Best DDR4 IC for all round performance |
  | A | Hynix 8Gb DJR, Micron 8Gb Rev. E<sup>1</sup>, Micron 16Gb Rev. B | Top Performing ICs. Known not to clockwall and generally scale with voltage. |
  | B | Hynix 8Gb CJR, Samsung 4Gb E-Die, Nanya 8Gb B-Die | High end ICs with the ability to run high frequencies with good timings. |

>   | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|

Author: ask Previousslayer

>   | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|

Author: https://www.reddit.com/r/overclocking/comments/cfp99g/ddr4_nanya_die_ryzen_overclocking/ also this, literally using this guide as a reference

>   | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|

Reviewer 2: Well that's what Thaiphoon is guessing but who knows if it's actually Nanya A-die.

Until we get some OC results, I'd recommend removing it.

>   | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|
```

  | D | Hynix 8Gb AFR, Hynix 8Gb BFR, Micron 8Gb Rev. B, Micron 8Gb Rev. H, Samsung 8Gb C-Die, Samsung 4Gb D-Die | Low end ICs commonly found in average cheap kits. Most are EOL and no longer relevant. 
  | F | Hynix 8Gb MFR, Micron 4Gb Rev. A, Samsung 4Gb S-Die, Nanya 4Gb A-Die, Nanya 8Gb C-Die | Terrible ICs unable to reliably attain even the highest standard of the base JEDEC Specification.|
  * Partially based off [Buildzoid's older ranking](https://www.reddit.com/r/overclocking/comments/8cjla5/the_best_manufacturerdie_of_ddr_ram_in_order/dxfgd4x/). Some ICs are not included in this list due to age of the post.

>   * <sup>1</sup> 8Gb Rev. E is extremely varied. The chips and various revisions that all fall under 8Gb Rev. E range from an IC that is comfortable overclocking with above average timings to an extremely strong one, being the world record holding IC and being known to get certain timings insanely tight.

Reviewer 2: Main differences are how tight tRCD can go and how high you can OC without VTT adjustment. The newer revisions (C9BKV, C9BLL, etc) can do tighter tRCD and higher frequency but everything else is similar.

* [3600 16-20-18 1.35V](https://www.reddit.com/r/Amd/comments/bpybh1/ddr43600_162018_on_4_dimms_with_ryzen_6400_karhu/)
* [3733 16-17-17 1.40V](https://www.reddit.com/r/overclocking/comments/bqnq0m/micron_edie_3733mhz_cas16_14v/)
* [3600 14-20-15 1.45V](https://www.reddit.com/r/Amd/comments/be9fou/some_more_fun_with_1600x_and_cheap_micron_edies/)

Author: theres also a slight difference to tRFC on average. 300ns min down to 280 min.

Author: addressed

* The tRFC timings are very dependent on temperatures, as they are related to capacitor leakage which is affected by temperature. Higher temperatures will need higher tRFC values. tRFC2 and tRFC4 are timings that activate when operating temperature of DRAM hits 85°C. Below these temperatures, these timings don't do anything.
* B-Die is temperature sensitive and its ideal range is ~30-40°C. Some may be able to withstand higher temperatures so YMMV.
* Rev. E, on the other hand, doesn't seem to be as strongly temperature sensitive, demonstrated by [builzdoid](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OeHEtULQg3Q).
* You might find that you're stable when running a memory test yet crash while gaming. This is because your CPU and/or GPU dump heat in the case, raising the RAM temperatures in the process. Thus, it is a good idea to stress test your GPU while running a memory test to simulate stability while gaming.
 
## Integrated Memory Controller (IMC)
### Intel - LGA1151
* Intel's Skylake IMC is pretty strong, so it shouldn't be the bottleneck when overclocking.  
  What would you expect from 14+++++?

> * The Rocketlake IMC, aside from the limitations regarding Gear 1 and Gear 2 memory support, has the strongest memory controller of all Intel consumer CPUs, and by a fair margin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The Rocket Lake IMC, aside from the limitations regarding Gear 1 and Gear 2 memory support, has the strongest memory controller of all Intel consumer CPUs, and by a fair margin.
```

  As you can see, 3000 15-16-16 is a tighter bin than 3200 16-18-18. This means that a kit rated for 3000 15-16-16 will probably be able to do 3200 16-18-18 but a kit rated for 3200 16-18-18 might not be able to do 3000 15-16-16. The frequency and timings difference is pretty small, so they'll probably overclock very similarly.
  
### Maximum Recommended Daily Voltage
* [JEDEC JESD79-4B (p.174)](http://www.softnology.biz/pdf/JESD79-4B.pdf) specifies that the absolute maximum is 1.50V.
  > Stresses greater than those listed under “Absolute Maximum Ratings” may cause permanent damage to the device. This is a stress rating only and functional operation of the device at these or any other conditions above those indicated in the operational sections of this specification is not implied. Exposure to absolute maximum rating conditions for extended periods may affect reliability.

> * THis value is the officialy maximum of the DDR4 Spec for which all DDR4 is to be rated for, however numerous ICs are unable to remain safe at such high sustained voltages. As an example, degradation can be seen scaling negatively with voltages higher than as low as 1.20V on ICs such as [Samsung 8Gb C-die](https://www.hardwareluxx.de/community/f13/samsung-8gbit-ddr4-c-die-k4a8g045wc-overclocking-ergebnisse-im-startbeitrag-1198323.html). Furthermore, there are other ICs, such as Hynix 8Gb DJR or Samsung 8Gb B die that have been observed dailying voltages well in excess of 1.55v. DO your research about what voltages are safe on your IC, or stick to 1.35v or similar if this value is not known. Due to random chance and silicon variance, YMMV.

Author: will address this soon

* One common limiting factor for the maximum safe voltage on which you can operate is the architecture on which your CPU is based. According to [JEDEC](https://www.jedec.org/standards-documents/dictionary/terms/output-stage-drain-power-voltage-vddq), VDDQ, the voltage of data output, is often tied to VDD, colloquially reffered to as VDIMM or DRAM Voltage. This voltage interacts with the PHY or Physical Layer present on the CPU and may lead to long term degredation if set too high.

> * It may be safe to daily 1.60V as there are kits on the [B550 Unify-X QVL](https://www.msi.com/Motherboard/support/MEG-B550-UNIFY-X#support-mem-20) rated for 1.60v. B-die, 8Gb Rev. E, DJR and potentially 16Gb Rev. B *should* be fine at running 1.60v daily, though it's recommended to have active airflow. Power output of RAM is tied to the voltage at whih it operates, and high voltages can themselves lower the threshold for what voltages are considered safe.

Author: Sorry. Meant temperature.

  | :-:  | :-: | :--:        |
  | S | Samsung 8Gb B-Die | Best DDR4 IC for all round performance |
  | A | Hynix 8Gb DJR, Micron 8Gb Rev. E<sup>1</sup>, Micron 16Gb Rev. B | Top Performing ICs. Known not to clockwall and generally scale with voltage. |
  | B | Hynix 8Gb CJR, Samsung 4Gb E-Die, Nanya 8Gb B-Die | High end ICs with the ability to run high frequencies with good timings. |
  | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|
  | D | Hynix 8Gb AFR, Hynix 8Gb BFR, Micron 8Gb Rev. B, Micron 8Gb Rev. H, Samsung 8Gb C-Die, Samsung 4Gb D-Die | Low end ICs commonly found in average cheap kits. Most are EOL and no longer relevant. 
  | F | Hynix 8Gb MFR, Micron 4Gb Rev. A, Samsung 4Gb S-Die, Nanya 4Gb A-Die, Nanya 8Gb C-Die | Terrible ICs unable to reliably attain even the highest standard of the base JEDEC Specification.|
  * Partially based off [Buildzoid's older ranking](https://www.reddit.com/r/overclocking/comments/8cjla5/the_best_manufacturerdie_of_ddr_ram_in_order/dxfgd4x/). Some ICs are not included in this list due to age of the post.

>   * <sup>1</sup> 8Gb Rev. E is extremely varied. The chips and various revisions that all fall under 8Gb Rev. E range from a really weak IC to an extremely strong one.

Author: Language was a bit strong. Will revise. Was trying to demonstrate how going from say Rev J to like newer C9BLM is almost as meaningful a difference as CJR vs DJR, from VTT, scaling, tRCD and tRFC

  | B | Hynix 8Gb CJR, Samsung 4Gb E-Die, Nanya 8Gb B-Die | High end ICs with the ability to run high frequencies with good timings. |
  | C | Hynix 8Gb JJR, Hynix 16Gb MJR, Hynix 16Gb CJR, Micron 16Gb Rev. E, Samsung 8Gb D-Die, Nanya 8Gb A-Die | Decent ICs with good performance and decent frequency scaling.|

>   | D | Hynix 8Gb AFR, Hynix 8Gb BFR, Micron 8Gb Rev. B, Micron 8Gb Rev. H, Samsung 8Gb C-Die, Samsung 4Gb D-Die | Low end ICs commonly found in average cheap kits. Most are EOL and no longer relevant. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  | D | Hynix 8Gb AFR, Micron 8Gb Rev. B, Samsung 8Gb C-Die, Samsung 4Gb D-Die | Low end ICs commonly found in average cheap kits. Most are EOL and no longer relevant. 
```

Can't seem to find much info on these ICs so it's best not to rank them until more about them is known

Author: There's sources for Rev H in the OC discord ram OC chat. It's either profile name, dabo or similar who had some. Peanut I think commented on it too.

>   | F | Hynix 8Gb MFR, Micron 4Gb Rev. A, Samsung 4Gb S-Die, Nanya 8Gb C-Die | Terrible ICs unable to reliably attain even the highest standard of the base JEDEC Specification.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  | F | Hynix 8Gb MFR, Micron 4Gb Rev. A, Samsung 4Gb S-Die | Terrible ICs unable to reliably attain even the highest standard of the base JEDEC Specification.|
```

  | D | Hynix 8Gb AFR, Hynix 8Gb BFR, Micron 8Gb Rev. B, Micron 8Gb Rev. H, Samsung 8Gb C-Die, Samsung 4Gb D-Die | Low end ICs commonly found in average cheap kits. Most are EOL and no longer relevant. 

>   | F | Hynix 8Gb MFR, Micron 4Gb Rev. A, Samsung 4Gb S-Die, Nanya 4Gb A-Die, Nanya 8Gb C-Die | Terrible ICs unable to reliably attain even the highest standard of the base JEDEC Specification.|

Reviewer 2: > Nanya 4Gb A-Die, Nanya 8Gb C-Die

Any OC results?

Author: No personal OC results. Will ask Prev. Otherwise, will remove.

  * Partially based off [Buildzoid's older ranking](https://www.reddit.com/r/overclocking/comments/8cjla5/the_best_manufacturerdie_of_ddr_ram_in_order/dxfgd4x/). Some ICs are not included in this list due to age of the post.

>   * <sup>1</sup> 8Gb Rev. E has a slight amount of variation. This mainly manifests as the minimum tRCD and tRP to which the ram scales. Similarly, timings such as tRAS, tRC and tRFC may be affected. VTT is a voltage that requires tuning on Rev. E to clock high and OC far, and different chips of Rev. E may behave differently in regards to how high they can clock without modification of VTT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * <sup>1</sup>Revisions of 8Gb Rev. E mainly differ in the minimum tRCD achievable and how high they can clock without modification of VTT while maintaining stability. Generally, newer revisions of 8Gb Rev. E (C9BKV, C9BLL, etc.) do tighter tRCD and clock higher without modification of VTT.
```

I don't think there's much difference in tRP, tRAS, tRC and tRFC outside of silicon lottery.

Author: Sure. I think it's more of a trend of silicon purity having gone up over time. Like how there shouldn't be a fundamental difference between coffee and coffee refresh.

  [~ The Stilt](https://www.overclock.net/forum/28031966-post35.html)  
  * On AGESA 1.0.0.4 or newer VDDG is separated into VDDG IOD and VDDG CCD for the I/O die and the chiplets parts, respectively.

* Below are the expected memory frequency ranges for 2 single rank DIMMs, provided your motherboard and ICs are capable:

>   | Ryzen | Expected Effective Clock (MHz) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  | Ryzen | Expected Effective Speed (MT/s) |
```

## Tightening Timings
* Make sure to run a memory test and benchmark after each change to ensure performance is improving.
  * I would recommend to benchmark 3 to 5 times and average the results, as memory benchmarks can have a bit of variance.

>   * Thereotical maximum bandwidth (MB/s) = `Transfers per clock * Actual Clock * Channel Count * Bus Width * Bit to Byte ratio`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Theoretical maximum bandwidth (MB/s) = `Transfers per clock * Actual Clock * Channel Count * Bus Width * Bit to Byte ratio`.
```

       * Transfers per clock refers to the number of data transfers that can occur in one full memory clock cycle. This occurs twice per cycle on DDR RAM, on the rising and falling clock edges.
       * Actual Clock is the real clock of the memory, simply measured in MHz. This is generally shown as the real memory frequency by programs such as CPU-Z.
       * Channel Count is the number of memory channels active on your CPU.
       * Bus Width is the width of each memory channel, measured in bits. Since DDR1, this is 64 bits.
       * Bit to Byte ratio is a constant 1/8, or 0.125
 

>     | Effective Memory Clock (MHz) | Max Dual Channel Bandwidth (MB/s) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    | Effective Memory Speed (MT/s) | Max Dual Channel Bandwidth (MB/s) |
```

    | 3733 | 59728 |
    | 3800 | 60800 |
    | 4000 | 64000 |
    
    * Your read and write bandwidth should be 90% - 98% of the theoretical maximum bandwidth.
      * On single CCD Ryzen 3000-5000 CPUs, write bandwidth should be 90% - 98% of half of the theoretical maximum bandwidth.  
        It is possible to hit half of the theoretical maximum write bandwidth. See [here](https://redd.it/cgc9bh).
      * Percentage of theoretically max bandwidth is inversely proportional to most memory timings. Generally speaking, as RAM timings are tightened, this value will increase.

1. I would recommend to tighten some of the secondary timings first, as they can speed up memory testing.  
   My suggestions:
   
   | Timing | Safe | Tight | Extreme |
   | ------ | ---- | ----- | ------- |
   | tRRDS tRRDL tFAW | 6, 6, 24 | 4, 6, 16 | 4, 4, 16 |
   | tWR | 16 | 12 | 10 |

>    * The minimum value for which lowering tFAW will have an effect on the performance of RAM is `tRRDS * 4` or `tRRDL * 4`, whichever is greater.

Author: Hahaha I'm fucking stupid yeah.

   * You don't have to run all of the timings at one preset. You might only be able to run tRRDS tRRDL tFAW at the tight preset, but you may be able to run tWR at the extreme preset.
   * On some Intel motherboards, tWR in the UEFI does nothing and instead needs to be controlled through tWRPRE (sometimes tWRPDEN). Dropping tWRPRE by 1 will drop tWR by 1, following the rule tWR = tWRPRE - tCWL - 4.
     
2. Next is tRFC. Default for 8Gb ICs is 350**ns** (note the units).
   * Note: Tightening tRFC too much can result in system freezes/lock ups.

>    * tRFC is a timing regulating the number of cycles for which the dram capacitors are "recharged" or refreshed. Because capacitor charge loss is proportional to temperature, RAM operating at higher temperatures may need substantially higher tRFC values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * tRFC is the number of cycles for which the DRAM capacitors are "recharged" or refreshed. Because capacitor charge loss is proportional to temperature, RAM operating at higher temperatures may need substantially higher tRFC values.
```

   * To convert to ns: `2000 * timing / ddr_freq`.  
   For example, tRFC 250 at DDR4-3200 is `2000 * 250 / 3200 = 156.25ns`.
   * To convert from ns (this is what you would type in your UEFI): `ns * ddr_freq / 2000`.  
   For example, 180ns at DDR4-3600 is `180 * 3600 / 2000 = 324`, so you would type 324 in your UEFI.
   * Below are the typical tRFC in ns for the common ICs:
   
     | IC | tRFC (ns) |
     | :-: | :-------: |
     | Hynix 8Gb AFR | 260 - 280 |
     | Hynix 8Gb CJR | 260 - 280 |
     | 8Gb DJR | 260 - 280 |
     | Micron 8Gb Rev. E | 280 - 310 |
     | Micron 16Gb Rev. B | 290 - 310 |
     | Samsung 8Gb B-Die | 120 - 180 |

>      | Samsung 8Gb C-Die | 300-340 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     | Samsung 8Gb C-Die | 300 - 340 |
```

   * On Intel, tWTRS/L should be left on auto and controlled with tWRRD_dg/sg respectively. Dropping tWRRD_dg by 1 will drop tWTRS by 1. Likewise with tWRRD_sg. Once they're as low as you can go, manually set tWTRS/L.
   * On Intel, changing tCWL will affect tWRRD_dg/sg and thus tWTR_S/L. If you lower tCWL by 1 you need to lower tWRRD_dg/sg by 1 to keep the same tWTR values. Note that this might also affect tWR per the relationship described earlier.
   * <sup>1</sup>Some motherboards don't play nice with odd tCWL. For example, I'm stable at 4000 15-19-19 tCWL 14, yet tCWL 15 doesn't even POST. Another user has had similar experiences. Some motherboards may seem fine but have issues with it at higher frequencies (Asus). Manually setting tCWL equal to tCL if tCL is even or one below if tCL is uneven should alleviate this (eg. if tCL = 18 try tCWL = 18 or 16, if tCL = 17 try tCWL = 16).

>    * The extreme preset is not the minimum floor in this case. tRTP can go as low as 5 (6 with Gear Down Mode on), while tWTRS/L can go as low as 1 and 6 respectively. Some boards are fine doing tCWL as low as tCL - 6. Keep in mind that this *will* increase the load on your memory controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * The extreme preset is not the minimum floor in this case. tRTP can go as low as 5 (6 with Gear Down Mode on), while tWTRS/L can go as low as 1/6. Some boards are fine doing tCWL as low as tCL - 6. Keep in mind that this *will* increase the load on your memory controller.
```

   * On Intel, tWTRS/L should be left on auto and controlled with tWRRD_dg/sg respectively. Dropping tWRRD_dg by 1 will drop tWTRS by 1. Likewise with tWRRD_sg. Once they're as low as you can go, manually set tWTRS/L.
   * On Intel, changing tCWL will affect tWRRD_dg/sg and thus tWTR_S/L. If you lower tCWL by 1 you need to lower tWRRD_dg/sg by 1 to keep the same tWTR values. Note that this might also affect tWR per the relationship described earlier.
   * <sup>1</sup>Some motherboards don't play nice with odd tCWL. For example, I'm stable at 4000 15-19-19 tCWL 14, yet tCWL 15 doesn't even POST. Another user has had similar experiences. Some motherboards may seem fine but have issues with it at higher frequencies (Asus). Manually setting tCWL equal to tCL if tCL is even or one below if tCL is uneven should alleviate this (eg. if tCL = 18 try tCWL = 18 or 16, if tCL = 17 try tCWL = 16).
   * The extreme preset is not the minimum floor in this case. tRTP can go as low as 5 (6 with Gear Down Mode on), while tWTRS/L can go as low as 1/6. Some boards are fine doing tCWL as low as tCL - 6. Keep in mind that this *will* increase the load on your memory controller.

>    * On AMD, tCWL can often be set to tCL - 2 but is known to require higher tWRRD. Read to Write burst gap is tCWL-tCL + tRDWR. Since this value normally has a set threshold fr stability, increase the gap between tCWL and tCL will require a higher tRDWR to compensate.

Reviewer 2: > Read to Write burst gap is tCWL-tCL + tRDWR. Since this value normally has a set threshold fr stability, increase the gap between tCWL and tCL will require a higher tRDWR to compensate.

Can you clarify?

Author: Read to write has a gap, which has a minimum threshold. Let say the ram needs this value at 10 clock cycles, 10nCK aka 5ns at 4000. That 10 burst is attained as tCWL-tCL + tRDWR. the value of that would need to be at or exceed 5ns for the ram to be stable. So if tCWL-tCL (as in the difference between them) increases from 0 to -2, then something else must increase, that something else being tWRRD.

Author: I'll remoe this anyways, makes no big dfiff

   
4. Now for the tertiaries:
    * If you're on AMD, refer to [this post](https://redd.it/ahs5a2).  
      My suggestion:
  
       | Timing | Safe | Tight | Extreme |
       | ------ | ---- | ----- | ------- |

>        | tRDRDSCL tWRWRSCL | 5 5 | 4 4 | 3 3 |

Reviewer 2: Don't think I've seen an IC that couldn't do SCLs at 4 4 apart from Micron Rev E at 5000

Author: I've seen it with CJR and Rev E. 5 vs 4 doesnt really even bring that big a gain tbh, but sure

Author: I'll change it back

   * <sup>1</sup>Some motherboards don't play nice with odd tCWL. For example, I'm stable at 4000 15-19-19 tCWL 14, yet tCWL 15 doesn't even POST. Another user has had similar experiences. Some motherboards may seem fine but have issues with it at higher frequencies (Asus). Manually setting tCWL equal to tCL if tCL is even or one below if tCL is uneven should alleviate this (eg. if tCL = 18 try tCWL = 18 or 16, if tCL = 17 try tCWL = 16).
   * The extreme preset is not the minimum floor in this case. tRTP can go as low as 5 (6 with Gear Down Mode on), while tWTRS/L can go as low as 1/6. Some boards are fine doing tCWL as low as tCL - 6. Keep in mind that this *will* increase the load on your memory controller.
   * On AMD, tCWL can often be set to tCL - 2 but is known to require higher tWRRD.
   
4. Now for the tertiaries:
    * If you're on AMD, refer to [this post](https://redd.it/ahs5a2).  
      My suggestion:
  
       | Timing | Safe | Tight | Extreme |
       | ------ | ---- | ----- | ------- |
       | tRDRDSCL tWRWRSCL | 4 4 | 3 3 | 2 2 |
     

>         * A lot of ICs are known to have issues with low SCLs. Values such as 2 are extremely difficult for all but ICs such as Samsung 8Gb B-Die. These values are no necessarily linked, and values such as 5 are acceptable. Mixing and matching is possible, and more often than not tRDRDSCL will be the one that needs to be run 1 or even 2 values higher. Values above 5 greatly hurt bandwidth and so their use is not advised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * A lot of ICs are known to have issues with low SCLs. Values such as 2 are extremely difficult for all but ICs such as Samsung 8Gb B-Die. These values are not necessarily linked, and values such as 5 are acceptable. Mixing and matching is possible, and more often than not tRDRDSCL will be the one that needs to be run 1 or even 2 values higher. Values above 5 greatly hurt bandwidth and so their use is not advised.
```

       | ------ | ---- | ----- | ------- |
       | tRDRDSCL tWRWRSCL | 4 4 | 3 3 | 2 2 |
     

>      

Reviewer 2: Random blank line?

Author: was playing around with spacing there, accidentally left it. please ignore

     * (1) [tRP 19 tRAS 42](https://i.imgur.com/gz1YDcO.png) - fully stable.
     * (2) [tRP 19 tRAS 36](https://i.imgur.com/lHjbLjC.png) - instant error.
     * (3) [tRP 25 tRAS 36](https://i.imgur.com/7c46Qes.png) - stable up to 500%.

>      * In (1) and (3), tRC is 61 and isn't completely unstable. However, in (2) tRC is 55 and RAMTest finds an error instantly. This indicates that my RAM can do low tRAS, but due to limitations of tRC's stability, tRC must be significantly more than it's minimum scaling value with low tRAS. Since tRC is hidden, I need higher tRAS to get higher tRC to ensure stability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     * In (1) and (3), tRC is 61 and isn't completely unstable. However, in (2) tRC is 55 and RAMTest finds an error instantly. This indicates that my RAM can do low tRAS, but not low tRC. Since tRC is hidden, I need higher tRAS to get higher tRC to ensure stability.
```

    AMD:
    * Getting GDM disabled and CR 1 stable can be pretty difficult but if you've come this far down the rabbit hole it's worth a shot.
    * If you can get GDM disabled and CR 1 stable without touching anything then you can skip this section.

>     * CR 1 becomes signficiantly harder to run the higher frequency goes. Oftentimes, increase CR to 2 can help you acheive higher frequencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * CR 1 becomes significantly harder to run as the frequency increases. Oftentimes, running CR 2 can help with achieving higher frequencies.
```

>     * On AMD, Gear Down Mode will override Command Rate. For this reason, turning Gear Down Mode off in order to set CR 2 may be benefitial to overall stability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * On AMD, Gear Down Mode will override Command Rate. For this reason, disabling Gear Down Mode in order to set CR 2 may be beneficial to overall stability.
```

    3. Run a memory test.
    4. Adjust setup times then drive strengths if unstable.
    * [My stable GDM off CR 1 settings](https://i.imgur.com/z547RLa.jpg)
    5. Oftentimes, a drive strength above 24 ohms may hurt stability. Furthermore, running non-zero setup times is rarely needed, however may aid in the stabilization of CR 1.
   
    Intel:
    * If below DDR4-4400, try setting CR to 1T. If that doesn't work, leave CR on 2T.
    * On Asus Maximus boards enabling Trace Centering can help greatly with pushing CR 1T to higher frequencies.

11. You can also increase DRAM voltage to drop timings even more. Keep in mind the [voltage scaling characteristics of your ICs](#voltage-scaling) and the [maximum recommended daily voltage](#maximum-recommended-daily-voltage).
    
## Miscellaneous Tips
* Usually a 200MHz increase in effective DRAM frequency negates the latency penalty of loosening tCL, tRCD and tRP by 1, but has the benefit of higher bandwidth.  
  For example, DDR4-3000 15-17-17 has the same latency as DDR4-3200 16-18-18, but DDR4-3200 16-18-18 has higher bandwidth. This is typically after initial tuning has been completed, and not at XMP.

> * Generally speaking, frequency should be prioritized over tighter timings, so long as other factors such as FCLK sync, Command Rate or Memory gear are not substantial factors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Generally speaking, frequency should be prioritized over tighter timings, so long as performance is not negatively impacted by FCLK sync, Command Rate or Memory Gear mode.
```

    
## Miscellaneous Tips
* Usually a 200MHz increase in DRAM frequency negates the latency penalty of loosening tCL, tRCD and tRP by 1, but has the benefit of higher bandwidth.  

>   For example, 3000 15-17-17 has the same latency as 3200 16-18-18, but 3200 16-18-18 has higher bandwidth. This is typically after initial tuning has been completed, and not at XMP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example, 3000 15-17-17 has the same latency as 3200 16-18-18, but 3200 16-18-18 has higher bandwidth. This is typically after initial tuning has been completed, and not at XMP.
```
